[rfc][skip-ci][reporting] Rendering API RFC (#64372)
elastic/kibana: rfcs/text/0011_reporting_as_an_api.md

- Start Date: 2020-04-23
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Kibana Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

The reporting plugin is migrating to a purely REST API interface, deprecating page-level integrations such as Dashboard and Discover.

# Basic example

Currently, reporting does expose an API for Dashboard exports as seen below.

```sh
# Massively truncated URL
curl -x POST http://localhost:5601/api/reporting/generate/printablePdf?jobParams=%28browserTimezone%3AAmerica%2FLos_Angeles%2Clayout...
```

Going forth, reporting would only offer a JSON-based REST API, deprecating older ad-hoc solutions:

```sh
curl -x POST http://localhost:5601/api/reporting/pdf
{
  “baseUrl”: “/my/kibana/page/route?foo=bar&reporting=true”,
  "waitUntil": {
    "event": “complete”,
  },
  “viewport”: {
    “width”: 1920,
    “height”: 1080,
    "scale": 1
  },
  "mediaType": "screen"
}
```

A simple JSON response is returned, with an identifier to query for status.

```json
{
  "id": "123"
}
```

Further information can be found via GET call with the job's ID:

```sh
curl http://localhost:5601/api/reporting/123/status
```

# Motivation

> The reporting functionality that currently exists in Kibana was originally purpose-built for the Discover, Dashboard and Canvas applications. Because of this, reportings underlying technologies and infrastructure are hard to improve upon and make generally available for pages across Kibana. Currently, the team has to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Reporting plugin that currently exists in Kibana was originally purpose-built for the Discover, Dashboard and Canvas applications. Because of this, Reporting's underlying technologies and infrastructure are hard to improve upon and make generally available for pages across Kibana. Currently, the team has to:
```

- Build and maintain our own Chromium binary for the 3 main operating systems we support.
- Fix and help troubleshoot issues encountered by our users and their complex deployment topologies.
- Ensure successful operation in smaller-sized cloud deployments.
- Help other teams get their applications “reportable”.
- Continue to adapt changes in Discover and Dashboard so that they can be reportable (WebGL for instance).

> In order to ensure the reporting works in a secure manner, we also maintain complex logic that ensures nothing goes wrong during report generation. These include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to ensure Reporting works in a secure manner, we also maintain complex logic that ensures nothing goes wrong during report generation. These include:
```

### 4. Deleting a job

A DELETE call will remove the report. If a report is in pending/running state, this will attempt to terminate the running job. Once a report is complete, the call to delete will permanently (hard delete) remove the job's output in ElasticSearch.

When successfully deleted, reporting will simply respond with a `204` HTTP code, indicating success.

```curl
curl -x DELETE http://localhost:5601/api/reporting/123

# Response (no body, 204 indicates success)
# 204 Content-Type text/plain;charset=UTF-8
```

# Drawbacks

Due to the new nature of this RFC, there are definitely drawbacks to this approach short-term. These short-term drawbacks become miniscule longer-term, since the work being done here frees both reporting and downstream teams to operate in parallel.

- Initial work to build this pipeline will freeze some current efforts (scheduled reports, etc).
- Doesn't solve complex architectural issues experienced by our customers.

> - Requires work to migrate our existing apps (Canvas, dashboard, visualizations).

Reviewer: I think the best thing to do will be to support both the current API and the next API simultaneously, and migrate each app one at a time. That will just mean having new endpoints for the new API and gradually deprecating what will be the "legacy"

Author: Yup: that was my thoughts on this as well, but need to add it here so it's crystal clear.
